An artificial intelligence framework and its 
bias for brain tumor segmentation: A 
narrative review 
Author links open overlay 
panelSuchismita Das a b, G.K. Nayak a, Luca Saba c, Mannudeep Kalra d, Jasjit 
S. Suri e, Sanjay Saxena a 
Show more 
Add to Mendeley 
Share 
Cite 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105273Get rights and content 
Highlights 
• 
• 
PRISMA search strategy and statistical distributions for brain tumor segmentation 
(BTS). 
• 
• 
Comparison between different AI models, its qualitative and quantitative analysis. 
• 
• 
Ranking Score Method for Risk-of-bias (RoB) estimation in AI. 
• 
• 
Usage of 32 AI attributes for mean score computation and cutoff determination. 
• 
• 
Primary and secondary recommendations for lowering the RoB in AI for BTS. 
Abstract 
Background 
Artificial intelligence (AI) has become a prominent technique for medical diagnosis and 
represents an essential role in detecting brain tumors. Although AI-based models are 
widely used in brain lesion segmentation (BLS), understanding their effectiveness is 
challenging due to their complexity and diversity. Several reviews on brain tumor 
segmentation are available, but none of them describe a link between the threats due to 
risk-of-bias (RoB) in AI and its architectures. In our review, we focused on linking RoB 
and different AI-based architectural Cluster in popular DL framework. Further, due to 
variance in these designs and input data types in medical imaging, it is necessary to 
present a narrative review considering all facets of BLS. 
Approach 
The proposed study uses a PRISMA strategy based on 75 relevant studies found by 
searching PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar. Based on the architectural 
evolution, DL studies were subsequently categorized into four classes: convolutional 
neural network (CNN)-based, encoder-decoder (ED)-based, transfer learning (TL)-
based, and hybrid DL (HDL)-based architectures. These studies were then analyzed 
considering 32 AI attributes, with clusters including AI architecture, imaging modalities, 
hyper-parameters, performance evaluation metrics, and clinical evaluation. Then, after 
these studies were scored for all attributes, a composite score was computed, 
normalized, and ranked. Thereafter, a bias cutoff (AP(ai)Bias 1.0, AtheroPoint, 
Roseville, CA, USA) was established to detect low-, moderate- and high-bias studies. 
Conclusion 
The four classes of architectures, from best-to worst-performing, are 
TL > ED > CNN > HDL. ED-based models had the lowest AI bias for BLS. This study 
presents a set of three primary and six secondary recommendations for lowering the 
RoB. 
Introduction 
According to data collected by Global Cancer Statistics in 2020 [1], brain tumors 
represent one of the most life-threatening cancers and the 21st most common type of 
cancer worldwide. Moreover, nearly 90% of primary central nervous system (CNS) 
tumors are brain tumors [2]. Brain tumors also have a significant financial impact, as 
treatments incur a mean cost of $2788 ± 3719 [3], which can vary depending on the 
imaging technique used. It is estimated that it costs $62,602 to extend a brain tumor 
patient's life by 16.3 months [3] when employing modern treatment techniques. Due to 
this financial burden, the death rate of brain tumor patients increases daily; the five-year 
average survival rate of the patients is 72.5% [4]. 
Medical imaging is considered one of the most promising and fastest ways to diagnose 
brain tumors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) are 
typically employed for brain scans [5]. MRI scans are among the most preferred 
methods for diagnosing brain tumors [6], as they provide more precise and detailed 
pictures than CT scans. MRI can also provide better images of soft tissue than CT and 
is useful for tissue characterization. Different MR images, such as T1-weighted, post-
contrast T1-weighted (T1ce), T2-weighted, and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) protocols [7] provide complementary information that helps segment the brain 
tumor and its surrounding tissues. The visual output of the different MRI modalities 
along with the segmented tumor regions, namely, necrosis, enhancing, and edema 
types [8] is shown in Fig. 1. The three tumor regions used in the practical clinical 
application are: (i) the necrosis region (consisting of non-enhancing and enhancing part 
of tumor), (ii) the enhancing region (consisting of enhancing part of the whole tumor), 
and (iii) the peritumoral edema region (consisting of edema region of the whole tumor)”. 
Glioma, which develops from glial cells, is one of the most common malignant tumors 
[9]. It is categorized into low-grade glioma (LGG), which grows slowly, and high-grade 
glioma (HGG), which is highly malignant and potentially life-threatening. HGG is 
untreatable in some cases, even when advanced imaging, radiotherapy, and surgical 
techniques are employed. HGG segmentation is a challenging task [10,11] due to cell 
mutations, irregular growth in multiple tissues, and the complex and diverse nature of 
HGG. Treatment is also challenging because tumor characteristics vary from patient to 
patient; therefore, it can be difficult to use a large number of scans and volumes when 
attempting to visualize and quantify lesions. These images also contain various artifacts 
[12], such as irregularities, pixel variations, and inhomogeneity, which are acquired 
through the use of different scanners. Therefore, an accurate and fast brain tumor 
segmentation (BTS) method is needed to handle binary (high and low) and multiple 
types of risk classes (e.g., low, mild, moderate, and high), thus promoting early 
diagnosis and cost-effective treatment. 
Artificial intelligence (AI) has become a prominent solution for medical diagnoses and is 
essential to detecting brain tumors. Generation-wise segmentation technologies are 
depicted in Fig. 2. The first generation of brain lesion segmentation (BLS) was primarily 
characterized by the conventional method [13,14]. The second and third generations 
mainly consisted of machine learning (ML)-based [10,15] and DL-based AI 
technologies. ML and DL differ in terms of how they derive features from instances. ML 
classification models often emerge as independent analytical learning models and 
obtain precise predictions using features that have been extracted. ML technology has 
been shown to be useful for tissue characterization in medical imaging applications [16]. 
The performance of ML methods [17,18] depends solely on the radiologist or researcher 
and their expertise in selecting the most compelling features, which results in biased 
methods. 
Therefore, researchers have become interested in AI-based deep learning (DL) models 
[19] that utilize various statistical knowledge layers and convolutional operations to 
obtain features and employ predictions [20,21]. DL-driven medical image analyses can 
change the current roles of radiologists and clinicians, allowing them to devote less time 
to screening medical images and concentrate more on making diagnoses and treatment 
decisions. Therefore, although DL techniques are more expensive than other 
techniques in terms of space and computation time, they produce exact predictions 
when implemented in a widespread dataset. 
After continuing an active on BLS for some past years, we observed that, to date, no 
review article on BLS has connected the latest AI technologies with the tumor imaging 
paradigm. This motivates us to present a systematic review on BLS using the latest AI 
technology of the deep learning paradigm. In this review, we discussed and presented a 
detailed statistical analysis of BLS in DL technology with respect to (i) DL-based AI 
architectures, (ii) model hyper-parameters, (iii) imaging modalities, (iv) clinical 
validation, and (v) scientific validation. Our finding from this analysis drives us towards 
the main contribution of the proposed review, which is to classify the DL-based 
segmentation model into four different categories (i.e., CNN-based, ED-based, TL-
based, HDL-based) and then perform a depth-wise bias analysis of these models for a 
BLS task. However, it is observed that there exists a bias in DL models for BLS, where 
the performance is very high but clinically there are not reliable or the model did not 
perform scientific or clinical validations or did not undergo hyper-parameterization to 
optimize the AI models. For evaluating the bias in these studies, we employ an 
AP(ai)Bias 1.0 (AtheroPoint, Roseville, CA, USA), which is based in essence on a 
ranking score method (RSM) [22]. Using the 32 AI-based attributes, we grade the 
attributes (using an AI expert with minimum of 10 years of experience), estimate the 
final score, normalize it, and then rank these studies to determine the low-bias and 
moderate-bias cutoffs. These bias studies are then linked to the AI architectures 
providing recommendations for improving the AI system design. The proposed narrative 
review selected the 75 best publications using the PRISMA model described in section 
2. This review presents (i) a statistical distribution of AI attributes in BLS for different DL 
architectures, (ii) AI architectures for tumor segmentation with a detailed explanation of 
four DL architecture classes, and (iii) a comprehensive risk-of-bias (RoB) analysis 
based on 32 different AI attributes such as dataset partitioning, activation function; 
statistical analysis, and clinical validation. 
The proposed narrative review selected the 75 best publications using the PRISMA 
model described in section 2. This review presents (i) a statistical distribution of AI 
attributes in BLS for different DL architectures, (ii) AI architectures for tumor 
segmentation with a detailed explanation of four DL architecture classes, and (iii) a 
comprehensive risk-of-bias (RoB) analysis based on 32 different AI attributes such as 
dataset partitioning, activation function; statistical analysis, and clinical validation. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the PRISMA 
model and statistical distributions; section 3 depicts the detailed classification of the DL 
architecture, along with its pros and cons. Then, in section 4, the RoB analysis is carried 
out—based on the analysis, a few recommendations are made to improve the bias of 
the studies. Finally, a critical discussion is presented in section 5. 
Section snippets 
PRISMA model design 
An extensive search was carried out on PubMed, Google Scholar, and Scopus. The 
keywords used for selecting studies were “brain tumor segmentation,” “deep learning in 
brain tumor segmentation,” “AI-based BLS,” “machine learning in brain tumor 
segmentation,” “CNN in brain tumor/lesion extraction,” “transfer learning in brain 
tumor/lesion extraction,” and “multiclass brain tumor classification.” Fig. 3 shows the 
PRISMA model consisting of the brain tumor articles used in this study. 
A total of 
AI architecture for brain tumor segmentation 
In the previous section, research trends in BTS and its importance, different BTS 
algorithms, its statistics in terms of hyper-parameters, and AI attributes were discussed. 
However, these parameters are used in every DL-based model to tune its performance, 
and we have to focus on the internal structure of the DL-based model, which greatly 
affects its design and implementation in research. Hence, this section presents a brief 
outline of different generations of segmentation techniques used in 
Risk-of-bias estimation and recommendations 
We have seen a detailed layout of different DL-based architecture, along with their 
performances and the AI attributes used in each of these models. However, each model 
essentially performs convolutional operations to extract the features. Pre-processing 
and over-fitting are also considered in each model to maximize the performance. To 
perform a detailed study on the behavior of the models used by different authors, we 
compute the bias studies of all articles and analyze them to make some 
Critical discussion 
The proposed study presented a narrative review for BTS using AI-based DL. Hence 
the review starts by describing the search strategy using the PRISMA model, followed 
by the statistical analysis of AI attributes. The review included 75 DL-based qualitative 
articles on BLS. DL-based studies on BLS continue to gain the interest of researchers; 
however, to the best of our knowledge, no review has focused on the architectural 
evolution of DL while aiming to understand the AI bias for BLS. Therefore,  
Conclusion 
DL is the most recent efficient AI technique in BTS due to its automatic feature 
extraction. We reviewed articles that employed four different DL architectural models 
(i.e., CNN-based, ED-based, TL-based, and HDL-based) utilizing a certain operation 
performed in each model for BLS. A statistical depth analysis was carried out. The 
results were displayed as pie charts and bar charts showing the distributions of different 
parameters such as image modalities, optimizers, activation function, 
References (197) 
• 
A. Wadhwa et al. 
A review on brain tumor segmentation of MRI images 
Magn. Reson. Imaging 
(Sep 2019) 
• 
H.-H. Chang et al. 
An electrostatic deformable model for medical image segmentation 
Comput. Med. Imag. Graph. 
(2008) 
• 
A. Aslam et al. 
Improved edge detection algorithm for brain tumor segmentation 
Procedia Comput. Sci. 
(2015) 
• 
K. Kamnitsas et al. 
Efficient multi-scale 3D CNN with fully connected CRF for accurate brain 
lesion segmentation 
Med. Image Anal. 
(2017) 
• 
S. Bacchi et al. 
Deep learning in the detection of high-grade glioma recurrence using multiple 
MRI sequences: a pilot study 
J. Clin. Neurosci. 
(2019) 
• 
D. Karimi et al. 
Transfer learning in medical image segmentation: new insights from analysis 
of the dynamics of model parameters and learned representations 
Artif. Intell. Med. 
(2021) 
• 
K. Thapaliya et al. 
Level set method with automatic selective local statistics for brain tumor 
segmentation in MR images 
Comput. Med. Imag. Graph. 
(2013) 
• 
U. Ilhan et al. 
Brain tumor segmentation based on a new threshold approach 
Procedia Comput. Sci. 
(2017) 
• 
S. Bonte et al. 
Machine learning based brain tumour segmentation on limited data using local 
texture and abnormality 
Comput. Biol. Med. 
(Jul 1 2018) 
• 
M. Soltaninejad 
Supervised learning based multimodal MRI brain tumour segmentation using 
texture features from supervoxels 
Comput. Methods Progr. Biomed. 
(Apr 2018) 
View more references 
Cited by (93) 
• A review on brain tumor segmentation based on deep learning methods with 
federated learning techniques 
2023, Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 
Citation Excerpt : 
In order to improve the generalization capabilities of deep models, it suggests prospective research 
approaches for synthesizing high-quality artificial brain tumor cases. Das et al (Das et al., 2022). 
employed a PRISMA methodology to classify 75 pertinent research works into four categories, 
namely convolutional neural network (CNN), encoder-decoder (ED), transfer learning (TL), and 
hybrid DL (HDL)-based architectures. 
Show abstract 
• Far wall plaque segmentation and area measurement in common and internal 
carotid artery ultrasound using U-series architectures: An unseen Artificial 
Intelligence paradigm for stroke risk assessment 
2022, Computers in Biology and Medicine 
Show abstract 
• UNet Deep Learning Architecture for Segmentation of Vascular and Non-
Vascular Images: A Microscopic Look at UNet Components Buffered With 
Pruning, Explainable Artificial Intelligence, and Bias 
2023, IEEE Access 
• Attention-Based UNet Deep Learning Model for Plaque Segmentation in 
Carotid Ultrasound for Stroke Risk Stratification: An Artificial Intelligence 
Paradigm 
2022, Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease 
• Four Types of Multiclass Frameworks for Pneumonia Classification and Its 
Validation in X-ray Scans Using Seven Types of Deep Learning Artificial 
Intelligence Models 
2022, Diagnostics 
• Brain Tumor Detection using VGG19 model on Adadelta and SGD Optimizer 
2022, 6th International Conference on Electronics, Communication and Aerospace 
Technology, ICECA 2022 - Proceedings 
 
