 
European Journal of Radiology 
Volume 176, July 2024, 111509 
 
Role of artificial intelligence in brain tumour 
imaging 
Author links open overlay panelEzekiel Chukwujindu a, Hafsa Faiz a, Sara AI-
Douri b, Khunsa Faiz c, Alexandra De Sequeira d 
Show more 
Add to Mendeley 
Share 
Cite 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrad.2024.111509Get rights and content 
Abstract 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a rapidly evolving field with many neuro-oncology 
applications. In this review, we discuss how AI can assist in brain tumour imaging, 
focusing on machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques. We describe 
how AI can help in lesion detection, differential diagnosis, anatomic 
segmentation, molecular marker identification, prognostication, and pseudo-progression 
evaluation. We also cover AI applications in non-glioma brain tumours, such as brain 
metastasis, posterior fossa, and pituitary tumours. We highlight the challenges and 
limitations of AI implementation in radiology, such as data quality, standardization, and 
integration. Based on the findings in the aforementioned areas, we conclude that AI can 
potentially improve the diagnosis and treatment of brain tumours and provide a path 
towards personalized medicine and better patient outcomes. 
Introduction 
Central nervous system cancer is the tenth leading cause of death in men and women 
[1]. Brain tumour is not the primary cause of mortality, yet 40 % of all other cancer types 
can develop into brain cancer due to metastasis [1]. The diagnosis of brain tumors is 
predominantly based on neuroimaging findings, using techniques such as contrast-
enhanced computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
Among the central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms, the most common type is Glioma 
originating from glial cells [2]. 
Gliomas are heterogeneous groups of disease, with many different histotypes and 
molecular subtypes ranging from slow growing pilocytic astrocytoma to the aggressive 
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Given poor prognosis of patients with brain cancer at a 
higher stage, accurate grading is crucial for treatment and prognosis. 
Common tests used for tumour diagnosis and grade estimation include neurological 
examination, imaging, biopsies, and biomarkers. Biopsies are the gold standard, but 
invasive and risky. 
Techniques such as contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) or magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) are used for diagnosis of brain tumours. As they are non-
invasive and accessible, many efforts have been made to increase the information from 
brain imaging. 
Conventional MRI sequences, which include pre- and postcontrast T1-weighted 
imaging, T2-weighted imaging, and T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) sequences, help delineate tumour volume and morphologic characteristics. 
Unfortunately, contrast enhancement is nonspecific, and the detection of foci of tumour 
infiltration within the T2-weighted FLAIR signal intensity abnormality is nearly impossible 
with conventional sequences [3]. 
Advanced MRI methods, including diffusion-weighted imaging, diffusion tensor imaging, 
perfusion MRI and MR spectroscopy, are used clinically for grading gliomas and 
identifying regions of tumour infiltration. They are usually qualitative and vary across 
sites, units, and methods. With increasing incidence of brain tumours, [4] a non-
invasive, automatic computer-aided tool that can diagnose and grade a tumour quickly 
is needed. 
One of the ways in which tumours can be swiftly diagnosed is through artificial 
intelligence. Artificial intelligence (AI) is defined as machines performing tasks 
characteristic of human intelligence [5]. AI-based algorithms have been used in the 
healthcare field to improve diagnosis, predict outcomes, guide efforts in drug discovery 
and for rapid data processing in clinical research. Moreover, neuroimaging research in 
AI has grown exponentially. There have been several articles published on the use of AI 
in brain tumour imaging. Ce et al [6] provided a description of AI-based models and a 
narrative review of their applications in various studies concerning brain imaging. Zhu et 
al [7] reviewed the latest machine learning-based AI applications in the radiomic 
analysis of brain tumours, providing a perspective on challenges and future avenues. 
However, other aspects of AI, such as its usage in non-glioma evaluations, as well as a 
discussion on the promise of the use of transformers in neuro-oncology imaging, is an 
important area of research. Thus, this article aims to evaluate the various uses of AI-
assisted tools in the diagnosis and treatment of brain tumours, with a unique focus on 
brain gliomas as well as non-glioma evaluations, and transformer-based networks in 
brain tumour imaging. 
Section snippets 
Machine learning 
Machine learning (ML), falling under the umbrella of AI, incorporates algorithms and 
statistical models to make predictions about new data points [8], [9]. In ML, computers 
learn automatically from data accumulation and improve with experience. 
Deep learning (DL) is a subclass of ML that processes raw unstructured data using 
multi-layered artificial neural networks (ANN) [8], [9]. It is currently the basis of most of 
the AI tools used for image interpretation.. It can extract features, analyze 
Artificial intelligence in image analysis 
One of the most common applications of AI is in the analysis of diagnostic imaging. 
The process (Fig. 6) often commences with transforming the raw visual data into a 
format comprehensible to various deep learning models. This transformation is critical, 
whether the model in use is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Vision Transformer 
(ViT), or another advanced architecture [11], [12]. The core essence of these models 
lies in their ability to interpret the visual content of images through a 
Lesion detection and grade Prediction 
AI can improve diagnosis of small lesions [17] by using MRI, CT and PET scan data. 
(Table 3). Small lesions affect treatment choices and are very relevant for DL algorithms 
[18]. CAD tools need to be tuned to ensure accuracy and reduce overdiagnosis and 
overtreatment (Fig. 1). 
Blanc-Durand et al [19] used dynamic 18F-FET PET images to detect brain lesions in 
glioma patients. They used a 3D U-Net CNN to classify lesion or non-lesion voxels from 
PET features. They got 0.9868 accuracy in training 
Ai applications in non-glioma evaluation 
Non-glioma brain tumours are a diverse group of brain tumours that can originate from 
different cell types and locations within the central nervous system. They include 
metastatic tumours, meningiomas, pituitary tumours, ependymomas, medulloblastomas, 
hemangioblastomas, and others. These tumours have different histopathological 
features, clinical manifestations, prognoses, and treatment options. Therefore, accurate 
and reliable methods for brain tumour classification are essential for improving  
Transformer-based neural networks in brain tumour 
imaging 
Transformers, a groundbreaking architecture initially revolutionizing natural language 
processing, as seen in models like ChatGPT, have expanded well beyond their original 
purpose. Their remarkable success in understanding and generating human language 
has paved the way for their application in medicine, specifically neuro-oncology imaging 
(Table 2), offering promising advancements in brain tumor diagnosis, classification and 
treatment. Transformers’ ability to efficiently process and analyze 
Challenges 
Implementing AI in radiology presents several challenges, including the need for high-
quality, ground-truth data, seamless integration into existing user workflows, and the 
development of methods that are generalizable, interpretable, and robust across 
different settings and population groups [79]. 
Data Quality and Diversity: Large, well-annotated, and diverse datasets are essential 
to minimize measurement errors [80] and enhance algorithm performance across 
various sites, parameters, and 
Conclusion 
This review discusses the use of AI in brain tumour imaging. The development of CAD 
tools can improve diagnostic accuracy in detecting small metastatic brain lesions, 
allowing for early and accurate treatment planning, particularly for stereotactic 
radiosurgery. 
AI-driven extraction of imaging features that are not visible to the human eye is 
transforming radiological image analysis and reporting from a qualitative interpretation 
to an objective, quantifiable, and reproducible task. 
Segmentation 
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted 
technologies in the writing process 
During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT in order to Analyze 
reviewed articles and to retrieve results findings. After using this tool/service, the 
author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for 
the content of the publication. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Ezekiel Chukwujindu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Hafsa Faiz: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Sara AI-
Douri: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data 
curation, Conceptualization. Khunsa Faiz: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Alexandra De 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 
References (80) 
• 
G.S. Tandel et al. 
Multiclass magnetic resonance imaging brain tumor classification using 
artificial intelligence paradigm 
Comput Biol Med 
(Jul. 2020) 
• 
Y. Yang 
A comparative analysis of eleven neural networks architectures for small 
datasets of lung images of COVID-19 patients toward improved clinical 
decisions 
Comput Biol Med 
(Dec. 2021) 
• 
L.F. Machado et al. 
MRI radiomics for the prediction of recurrence in patients with clinically non-
functioning pituitary macroadenomas 
Comput Biol Med 
(Sep. 2020) 
• 
P. Wesseling et al. 
WHO 2016 Classification of gliomas 
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 
(Feb. 2018) 
• 
S.J. Price 
Improved delineation of glioma margins and regions of infiltration with the use 
of diffusion tensor imaging: an image-guided biopsy study 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
(Oct. 2006) 
• 
N. Grech et al. 
Rising incidence of glioblastoma multiforme in a well-defined population 
Cureus 
(May 2020) 
• 
S. Aneja et al. 
Applications of artificial intelligence in neuro-oncology 
Curr Opin Neurol 
(Dec. 2019) 
• 
M. Cè 
Artificial intelligence in brain tumor imaging: a step toward personalized 
medicine 
Current Oncology 
(Mar. 01, 2023.) 
• 
M. Zhu 
Artificial intelligence in the radiomic analysis of glioblastomas: A review, 
taxonomy, and perspective 
Front Oncol 
(Aug. 2022) 
• 
M. Rowe 
An introduction to machine learning for clinicians 
Academic Medicine 
(Oct. 2019) 
View more references 
Cited by (4) 
• Automated segmentation in pelvic radiotherapy: A comprehensive evaluation 
of ATLAS-, machine learning-, and deep learning-based models 
2024, Physica Medica 
Citation Excerpt : 
Furthermore, especially in abdomen and pelvis CT scans, the scarce contrast between soft tissue 
organs and the high anatomical variability usually limits automated segmentation performances [9]. 
Lastly, images are reconstructed during acquisition to have a predefined voxel size leading to partial 
volume averaging [10]. In recent years, taking full advantage of Convolutional Neural Network, 
automated segmentation tools have migrated from the research domain to commercially available 
products. 
Show abstract 
• Improved EfficientNet Architecture for Multi-Grade Brain Tumor Detection 
2025, Electronics (Switzerland) 
• Feasibility study of GTV determination in brain metastases based on contrast-
enhanced T2-FLAIR 
2025, Chinese Journal of Cancer Prevention and Treatment 
• Transfer Learning Approaches for Brain Metastases Screenings 
2024, Biomedicines 
 
